Add query optimization guidance to Advanced Queries Analysis (#36685)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/ddsql_reference/_index.md

| akeys(hstore tags)                            | Array of text | Gets the keys of an HSTORE as an array                                                            |
| avals(hstore tags)                            | Array of text | Gets the values of an HSTORE as an array                                                          |

## Writing efficient queries

> Queries that read large amounts of data or run heavy computations can be slow or return resource errors. The patterns below are the most common causes—each with a rewrite that usually resolves the issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Queries that read large amounts of data or run heavy computations can be slow or return resource errors. The patterns below are the most common causes, each with a rewrite that usually resolves the issue.
```

> The shortest summary: **filter early, aggregate early.** Work pushed into the query filter or a `GROUP BY` summary is computed against the index; work left to a `JOIN` or a wide `LIMIT` is held in memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Filter early and aggregate early**. Computations in the query filter or a `GROUP BY` summary run against the index. Computations in a `JOIN` or a wide `LIMIT` are held in memory.
```

### Checklist

> Walk through this before re-running a slow query:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before re-running a slow query, ask the following questions:
```

- Does the query filter include a selective token (not a wildcard like `service:*` or `env:*`)?
- Is the time range as small as it can be for the question?
- Are you selecting only the columns you actually use?
- If you have a large `LIMIT`, could a `GROUP BY` summary work instead?
- If you have many JOINs, could it be rewritten as a single scan?
- When joining across sources, is each side filtered?

> - Is the JOIN key high-cardinality (user / request / trace ID)?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If you have many `JOIN` clauses, could the query be rewritten as a single scan?
- When joining across sources, is each side filtered?
- Is the `JOIN` key high-cardinality (user/ request/trace ID)?
```

- Is the same regex being run more than once per row?

### Filtering

#### Filter on the data source

> Always include a selective token in your data source query—`service:`, `host:`, `env:`, or any `@attribute:value`. Wildcard filters such as `service:*` or `env:*` match every event, so they don't actually narrow the data—treat them as equivalent to leaving the filter blank.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Always include a selective token in your data source query, such as `service:`, `host:`, `env:`, or any `@attribute:value`. 

Wildcard filters such as `service:*` or `env:*` match every event, so they don't actually narrow the data. Treat these filters as equivalent to leaving the filter blank.
```

**Before**

```sql
SELECT *
FROM logs
WHERE timestamp >= NOW() - INTERVAL '7 days';      -- no service or host filter
```

**After**

```sql
SELECT *
FROM logs
WHERE service = 'checkout-api'
  AND env     = 'prod'
  AND timestamp >= NOW() - INTERVAL '7 days';      -- same window, but with a selective filter
```

#### Choose a time range that fits the question

Scan time grows with the time range. Consider starting with a window that covers the question (often a few hours or a day) and widening only when the question demands more. For long-term trends, a pre-aggregated metric or a daily-summary query runs faster than re-scanning raw events on every run.

*Goal: understand log volume from the billing service over the last month.*

**Before**

```sql
-- A single query scanning 31 days of raw events
SELECT *

> FROM logs

Reviewer 2: Are we sure we want to use `select * from logs` as an example for this? given the way to query logs in DDSQL Editor is through a PTF. So users reading this might be misled in thinking that `select * from logs` is a valid way of fetching logs

Reviewer 3: agreed - lets replace it with a logs PTF? To make it valid DDSQL that is agnostic to DDSQL Editor or Notebooks

WHERE service = 'billing'
  AND timestamp >= NOW() - INTERVAL '31 days';
```

**After**

```sql
-- Aggregate up front for trends instead of scanning raw events
SELECT date_trunc('day', timestamp) AS day, count(*) AS events
FROM logs
WHERE service = 'billing'
  AND timestamp >= NOW() - INTERVAL '7 days'
GROUP BY 1
ORDER BY 1;
```

### Column selection

#### Project only the columns you use

> Each column in your query is fetched from storage. Trim the column list to what you use downstream—wide attributes like the raw `message` or full HTTP headers can slow down the query significantly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each column in your query is fetched from storage. Trim the column list to what you use downstream. Wide attributes like the raw `message` or full HTTP headers can slow down the query significantly.
```

**Before**

```sql
SELECT *                                            -- pulls every column, including the raw message
FROM logs
WHERE service = 'checkout-api';
```

**After**

```sql
SELECT timestamp, service, host                     -- only what the analysis uses
FROM logs
WHERE service = 'checkout-api';
```

### Aggregations

#### Return summaries, not raw rows

> When your goal is to understand the data—top-N, counts per category, distributions—a `GROUP BY` returns a focused result that is faster to compute and easier to work with than scanning millions of raw rows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When your goal is to understand the data (such as top-N, counts per category, or distributions), a `GROUP BY` returns a focused result that is faster to compute and easier to work with than scanning millions of raw rows.
```

**Before**

```sql
SELECT *
FROM logs WHERE service = 'orders-api'
LIMIT 5000000;
```

**After**

```sql
-- Returns ~10 rows (one per status_code), answers the actual question
SELECT status_code, count(*) AS hits
FROM logs WHERE service = 'orders-api'
GROUP BY status_code
ORDER BY hits DESC
LIMIT 100;
```

> **Note:** Aggregating in SQL with `GROUP BY` is more efficient than fetching raw rows and aggregating in a downstream step—the engine filters and summarizes data at the source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** Aggregating in SQL with `GROUP BY` is more efficient than fetching raw rows and aggregating in a downstream step. The engine filters and summarizes data at the source.
```

#### Narrow the scan before aggregating on a high-cardinality column

> `SELECT DISTINCT` or `GROUP BY` on a high-cardinality column (an email, an IP, a request ID) keeps one entry per distinct value across workers, which grows unboundedly without a tight filter. Narrow the data source filter first so the aggregation runs over fewer rows. For wide cardinalities, pre-aggregate to one row per time bucket and key, then count distinct across buckets. `approx_distinct(...)` is faster than exact `count(distinct ...)`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When working with high-cardinality columns (such as emails, IPs, or request IDs):
-  Use `SELECT DISTINCT` or `GROUP BY` to return one entry per distinct value across workers. Without a tight filter, the result set grows without bound.
- Narrow the data source filter first so the aggregation runs over fewer rows.
- For wide cardinalities, pre-aggregate to one row per time bucket and key, then count distinct across buckets.
- Use `approx_distinct(...)` instead of exact `count(distinct ...)` for better performance.
```

*Goal: find the distinct user emails in the checkout service's logs over the last 7 days.*

**Before**

```sql
SELECT DISTINCT user_email
FROM logs
WHERE timestamp >= NOW() - INTERVAL '7 days';    -- no service filter, unbounded set
```

**After**

```sql
-- Pre-aggregate to one row per (day, email), then count distinct across days
SELECT count(DISTINCT user_email) AS distinct_emails
FROM (
  SELECT date_trunc('day', timestamp) AS day, user_email
  FROM logs
  WHERE service = 'checkout-api'
    AND timestamp >= NOW() - INTERVAL '7 days'
  GROUP BY 1, 2
) daily;
```

### Joins

#### Combine self-joins into a single scan

Joining one source to itself many times to correlate different events is one of the most common causes of slow queries. Most self-joins can be rewritten as a single scan with `CASE` expressions, window functions, or `GROUP BY ... HAVING`.

> **Before—4 self-joins**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Before: 4 self-joins**
```

```sql
WITH a AS (SELECT user_id FROM logs WHERE service='checkout-api'),
     b AS (SELECT user_id FROM logs WHERE service='payment-api'),
     c AS (SELECT user_id FROM logs WHERE service='shipping-api'),
     d AS (SELECT user_id FROM logs WHERE service='orders-api')
SELECT user_id
FROM a JOIN b USING (user_id)
       JOIN c USING (user_id)
       JOIN d USING (user_id);
```

> **After—single scan**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**After: single scan**
```

```sql
SELECT user_id
FROM logs
WHERE service IN ('checkout-api','payment-api','shipping-api','orders-api')
GROUP BY user_id
HAVING count(DISTINCT service) = 4;
```

#### Use a high-cardinality join key

> Prefer a high-cardinality key (`user_id`, `request_id`, `trace_id`) when joining. Coarse keys like `service` or `status` can expand a moderate input into billions of intermediate rows. For large datasets, also narrow the data source filter and time range on each side of the join.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When joining, prefer a high-cardinality key like `user_id`, `request_id`, or `trace_id`. Coarse keys like `service` or `status` can expand a moderate input into billions of intermediate rows. For large datasets, also narrow the data source filter and time range on each side of the join.
```

#### Filter both sides of a cross-source join

> When you `JOIN` across two data sources (logs + RUM, logs + traces, feed + logs), apply a selective filter on each side. An unfiltered side becomes a full scan that has to be held in memory for the join. Where possible, pre-aggregate each source separately and join the summaries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you `JOIN` across two data sources, apply a selective filter on each side. Examples include logs + RUM, logs + traces, and feed + logs. An unfiltered side becomes a full scan that has to be held in memory for the join. Where possible, pre-aggregate each source separately and join the summaries.
```
